Chattr (#225)
rstudio/ai-blog: _posts/2024-04-04-chat-with-llms-using-chattr/chat-with-llms-using-chattr.Rmd

---
title: "Chat with AI in RStudio"
description: >

>   Interact with Github Copilot, and OpenAI's GPT (ChatGPT) models directly in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Interact with Github Copilot and OpenAI's GPT (ChatGPT) models directly in
```
Unbalanced comma, either add a comma after "models" or remove the first comma. I suggest removing.

  RStudio. The `chattr` Shiny add-in makes it easy for you to interact with 

>   these, and other, Large Language Models (LLMs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  these and other Large Language Models (LLMs).
```

author:
  - name: Edgar Ruiz
    affiliation: Posit
    affiliation_url: https://www.posit.co/
slug: llms-with-chattr
date: 2024-04-04
categories:
  - Generenative Models
  - Packages/Releases  
  - R
output:
  distill::distill_article:
    self_contained: false
    toc: true
preview: images/chattr.png
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(
  echo = TRUE,
  eval = FALSE
  )
```

`chattr` is a package that enables interaction with Large Language Models (LLMs), 
such as GitHub Copilot Chat, and OpenAI's GPT 3.5 and 4. The main vehicle is a
Shiny app that runs inside the RStudio IDE. Here is an example of what it looks
like running inside the Viewer pane:

> ```{r, echo=FALSE, eval=TRUE, out.width="600px", fig.cap="`chattr`'s Shiny app", fig.alt="Screenshot of the chattr Shiny app, which displays an example of a single interaction with the OpenAI GPT model. I asked for an example of a simple example of a ggplot2, and it returned an example using geom_point()"}

Reviewer: Nice slug for accessibility! :rocket:

Author: Thanks!

`chattr` will use this file to load all of the defaults, including the selected
model. 

A more extensive description of this feature is available in the `chattr` website
under 
[Modify prompt enhancements](https://mlverse.github.io/chattr/articles/prompt_defaults.html)

## Beyond the app

In addition to the Shiny app, `chattr` offers a couple of other ways to interact
with the LLM:

- Use the `chattr()` function
- Highlight a question in your script, and use it as your prompt

```r
> chattr("how do I remove the legend from a ggplot?")
#> You can remove the legend from a ggplot by adding 
#> `theme(legend.position = "none")` to your ggplot code. 
```

A more detailed article is available in `chattr` website 
[here](https://mlverse.github.io/chattr/articles/other-interfaces.html).

## RStudio Add-ins

`chattr` comes with two RStudio add-ins:

- **Send prompt** - It will submit the highlighted question from your script
to the LLM

- **Open Chat** - It will open the `chattr` app as a Shiny gadget

```{r, echo=FALSE, eval=TRUE, out.width="400px", fig.cap="`chattr` add-ins", fig.alt="Screenshot of the chattr addins in RStudio"}
knitr::include_graphics("images/addin.png")
```

> The idea is that you will be able to tie these add-in calls to keyboard shortcuts.
> This will make it really easy for you to open the app, without having to write
> the command every time. To learn how to do that, see the [Keyboard Shortcut](https://mlverse.github.io/chattr/#keyboard-shortcut) section in the
> `chattr` official website. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can bind these add-in calls to keyboard shortcuts, making it easy to open the app without having to write
the command every time. To learn how to do that, see the [Keyboard Shortcut](https://mlverse.github.io/chattr/#keyboard-shortcut) section in the
`chattr` official website. 
```

with a variety of local models. At this time, LlamaGPTJ-chat integrates with the
following families of models:

- **GPT-J** (ggml and gpt4all models)
- **LLaMA** (ggml Vicuna models from Meta)
- **Mosaic Pretrained Transformers (MPT)** 

LlamaGPTJ-chat works right off the terminal. `chattr` integrates with the
application by starting an 'hidden' terminal session. There it initializes the
selected model, and makes it available to start chatting with it. 

To get started, you need to install LlamaGPTJ-chat, and download a compatible
model. More detailed instructions are found
[here](https://mlverse.github.io/chattr/articles/backend-llamagpt.html#installation).

`chattr` looks for the location of the LlamaGPTJ-chat, and the installed model
in a specific folder location in your machine. If your installation paths do 
not match the locations expected by `chattr`, then the *LlamaGPT* will not show 
up in the menu. But that is OK, you can still access it with `chattr_use()`,
and then "tell" `chattr` the correct path using `chattr_defaults()`:

```r
library(chattr)
chattr_use("llamagpt")
chattr_defaults(
  path = "[path to compiled program]",
  model = "[path to model]"

>   )

Reviewer: ```suggestion
)
```

```

## Extending `chattr`

> The idea for `chattr` is to make it easier for new LLM APIs to be added. `chattr`
> is basically split in two sections, the user-interface (Shiny app and 
> `chattr()` function), and the included back-ends (GPT, Copilot, LLamaGPT). 
> New back-ends do not need to be added directly in `chattr`.  If you are a package
> developer, and would like to take advantage of the `chattr` UI, you will only 
> need to include a `ch_submit()` method in your package. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`chattr` aims to make it easy for new LLM APIs to be added. `chattr`
has two components, the user-interface (Shiny app and 
`chattr()` function), and the included back-ends (GPT, Copilot, LLamaGPT). 
New back-ends do not need to be added directly in `chattr`. 
If you are a package
developer and would like to take advantage of the `chattr` UI, all you need to do is  define `ch_submit()` method in your package.
```

The two output requirements for `ch_submit()` are: 

- As the final return value, send the full response from the model you are 

> integrating into `chattr`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
integrating into `chattr`.
```

> - If streaming (`stream` is TRUE), output the current output as it is occurring. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If streaming (`stream` is `TRUE`), output the current output as it is occurring. 
```

Generally through a `cat()` function call. 

Here is a simple toy example that shows how to create a custom method for
`chattr`: 

``` r
library(chattr)
ch_submit.ch_my_llm <- function(defaults,
                                prompt = NULL,
                                stream = NULL,
                                prompt_build = TRUE,
                                preview = FALSE,
                                ...) {

>   # Use `prompt_build` to append the prompts you with to append

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  # Use `prompt_build` to prepend the prompt
```
